R25 B.Tech. ECE Syllabus JNTUH Hyderabad
CH206BS: ENGINEERING CHEMISTRY LAB
B.Tech. I Year II Sem. L T P C
0 0 2 1
Course Description: The course includes experiments based on fundamental principles of chemistry
essential for engineering students, aiming to develop practical skills and reinforce theoretical
concepts.
Course Objectives
1. Students will understand and perform experiments based on core chemical principles relevant
to engineering applications.
2. Students will learn to estimate the hardness of water to assess its suitability for drinking
purposes.
3. Students will acquire the ability to perform acid-base titrations using instrumental methods
such as conductometry, potentiometry, and pH metry.
4. Students will gain hands-on experience in synthesizing polymers like Bakelite and Nylon – 6,
6 in the laboratory.
5. Students will learn to determine the unknown concentration of potassium permanganate
(KMnO4) using a calibration curve.
Course Outcomes:
1. Students will develop practical skills through hands-on chemistry experiments relevant to
engineering.
2. Students will learn to determine important parameters such as water hardness and the
corrosion rate of mild steel under various conditions.
3. Students will be able to apply techniques like conductometry, potentiometry, and pH metry to
determine concentrations or equivalence points in acid-base reactions.
4. Students will gain experience in synthesizing polymers such as Bakelite and Nylon-6,6.
5. Students will understand the working principle of colorimetry and the relationship between
absorbance and concentration (Beer-Lambert Law).
List of Experiments:
I. Volumetric Analysis: Estimation of Hardness of water by EDTA Complexometry method.
II. Conductometry:
1. Estimation of the concentration of strong acid by Conductometry.
2. Estimation of the concentration of strong and weak acid in an acid mixture by
Conductometry.
III. Potentiometry:
1. Estimation of concentration of Fe+2ion by Potentiometry using KMnO4.
2. Estimation of concentration of strong acid with strong base by Potentiometry using
quinhydrone
IV. pH Metry: Determination of an acid concentration using pH meter.
V. Colorimetry: Verification of Lambert-Beer’s law using KMnO4.
VI. Preparations:
1. Preparation of Bakelite.
2. Preparation Nylon – 6, 6.
VII. Corrosion: Determination of rate of corrosion of mild steel in the presence and absence of
inhibitor.
VIII. Virtual lab experiments:
1. Construction of Fuel cell and it’s working.
2. Smart materials for Biomedical applications
3. Batteries for electrical vehicles.
4. Functioning of solar cell and its applications.
REFERENCE BOOKS:
1. Lab manual for Engineering chemistry by B. Ramadevi and P. Aparna, S Chand Publications,
New Delhi (2022)
2. Vogel’s text book of practical organic chemistry 5th edition
3. Inorganic Quantitative analysis by A.I. Vogel, ELBS Publications.
4. College Practical Chemistry by V.K. Ahluwalia, Narosa Publications Ltd. New Delhi (2007).
