R25 B.Tech. ECE Syllabus JNTUH Hyderabad
CH202BS: ENGINEERING CHEMISTRY
B.Tech. I Year II Sem. L T P C
 3 0 0 3
Course Objectives:
1. To develop adaptability to new advances in Engineering Chemistry and acquire the essential
skills to become a competent engineering professional.
2. To understand the industrial significance of water treatment, fundamental principles of battery
chemistry, and the impact of corrosion along with its control methods for structural protection.
3. To impart foundational knowledge of various energy sources and their practical applications in
engineering.
4. To equip students with an understanding of smart materials, biosensors, and analytical
techniques applicable in engineering, industrial, environmental, and biomedical fields.
Course Outcomes:
1. Students will be able to understand the fundamental properties of water and its applications in
both domestic and industrial purposes.
2. Students will gain basic knowledge of electrochemical processes and their relevance to
corrosion and its control methods.
3. Students will comprehend the significance and practical applications of batteries and various
energy sources, enhancing their potential as future engineers and entrepreneurs.
4. Students will learn the basic concepts and properties of polymers and other engineering
materials.
5. Students will be able to apply the principles of UV-Visible, IR spectroscopy and Raman
spectroscopy in analyzing pollutants in dye industries and biomedical applications.
UNIT-I: Water and its treatment: [8]
Introduction- Hardness, types, degree of hardness and units. Estimation of hardness of water by
complexometric method - Numerical problems. Potable water and its specifications (WHO) - Steps
involved in the treatment of potable water - Disinfection of potable water by chlorination and breakpoint chlorination. Defluoridation - Nalgonda technique.
Boiler troubles: Scales, Sludges and Caustic embrittlement. Internal treatment of boiler feed water -
Calgon conditioning, Phosphate conditioning, Colloidal conditioning. External treatment methods -
Softening of water by ion- exchange processes. Desalination of brackish water – Reverse osmosis.
UNIT-II: Electrochemistry and Corrosion: [8]
Introduction- Electrode potential, standard electrode potential, Nernst equation (no derivation),
electrochemical cell - Galvanic cell, cell representation, EMF of cell - Numerical problems. Types of
electrodes, reference electrodes - Primary reference electrode - Standard Hydrogen Electrode (SHE),
Secondary reference electrode - Calomel electrode. Construction, working and determination of pH of
unknown solution using SHE and Calomel electrode.
Corrosion: Introduction- Definition, causes and effects of corrosion – Theories of corrosion, chemical
and electrochemical theories of corrosion, Types of corrosion: galvanic, water-line and pitting
corrosion. Factors affecting rate of corrosion - Nature of the metal, Nature of the corroding
environment. Corrosion control methods - Cathodic protection Methods - Sacrificial anode and
impressed current methods.
UNIT–III: Energy sources: [8]
Batteries: Introduction – Classification of batteries - Primary, secondary and reserve batteries with
examples. Construction, working and applications of Zn-air and Lithium ion battery. Fuel Cells –
Differences between a battery and a fuel cell, Construction and applications of Direct Methanol Fuel
Cell (DMFC).
R25 B.Tech. ECE Syllabus JNTUH Hyderabad
Fuels: Introduction and characteristics of a good fuel, Calorific value – Units - HCV, LCV- Dulongs
formula - Numerical problems.
Fossil fuels: Introduction, Classification, Petroleum - Refining of Crude oil, Cracking - Types of
cracking - Moving bed catalytic cracking. LPG and CNG composition and uses.
Synthetic Fuels: Fischer-Tropsch process, Introduction and applications of Hythane and Green
Hydrogen.
UNIT - IV: Polymers: [8]
Definition - Classification of polymers: Based on origin and tacticity with examples – Types of
polymerization - Addition (free radical addition mechanism) and condensation polymerization.
Plastics, Elastomers and Fibers: Definition and applications (PVC, Buna-S, Nylon-6,6). Differences
between themoplastics and thermo setting plastics, Fiber reinforced plastics (FRP).
Conducting polymers: Definition and Classification with examples - Mechanism of conduction in transpoly-acetylene and applications of conducting polymers.
Biodegradable polymers: Polylactic acid and its applications.
UNIT-V- Advanced Functional Materials: [8]
Smart materials: Introduction, Classification with examples - Shape Memory Alloys – Nitinol,
Piezoelectric materials – quartz and their engineering applications.
Biosensor - Definition, Amperometric Glucose monitor sensor.
Interpretative spectroscopic applications of UV-Visible spectroscopy for Analysis of pollutants in dye
industry, IR spectroscopy in night vision-security, Pollution Under Control- CO sensor (Passive
Infrared detection), Raman spectroscopy (application) - Tumour detection in medical applications.
TEXT BOOKS:
1. Engineering Chemistry by P.C. Jain and M. Jain, Dhanpatrai Publishing Company, 2010.
2. Engineering Chemistry by Rama Devi, Dr. P. Aparna and Rath, Cengage learning, 2025.
REFERENCE BOOKS:
1. Engineering Chemistry: by Thirumala Chary Laxminarayana & Shashikala, Pearson
Publications (2020)
2. Engineering Chemistry by Shashi Chawla, Dhanpatrai and Company (P) Ltd. Delhi 2011.
3. Engineering Chemistry by Shikha Agarwal, Cambridge University Press, Delhi 2015.
4. Engineering Analysis of Smart Material Systems by Donald J. Leo, Wiley, 2007.
5. Challenges and Opportunities in Green Hydrogen by Editors: Paramvir Singh, Avinash Kumar
Agarwal, Anupma Thakur, R.K Sinha.
6. Raman Spectroscopy in Human Health and Biomedicine, https://www.worldscientific.com/
doi/epdf/10.1142/13094
7. E-Content- https://doi.org/10.1142/13094 | October 2023
8. E-books:
https://archive.org/details/EngineeringChemistryByShashiChawla/page/n11/mode/2u 
