PR25 B.Tech. CSE Syllabus     
Pallavi Engineering College 
PCS207ES: DATA STRUCTURES LAB 
Common Syllabus for CSE, CSE-CS, CSE-DS, CSE-AI&ML, ECE, EEE 
B.Tech. I Year II Sem.           
Prerequisites: A course on “Programming for Problem Solving”. 
Course Objectives: 
1. It covers various concepts of C programming language 
2. It introduces searching and sorting algorithms 
3. It provides an understanding of data structures such as stacks and queues. 
Course Outcomes: 
L  T   P  C 
0    0   2  1 
1. Ability to develop C programs for computing and real-life applications using basic elements like 
control statements, arrays, functions, pointers and strings, and data structures like stacks, queues 
and linked lists. 
2. Ability to Implement searching and sorting algorithms 
List of Experiments 
1. Write a program that uses functions to perform the following operations on singly linked list.: 
i) Creation 
ii) Insertion 
iii) Deletion 
iv) Traversal 
2. Write a program that uses functions to perform the following operations on doubly linked list.: 
i) Creation 
ii) Insertion 
iii) Deletion 
iv) Traversal 
3. Write a program that uses functions to perform the following operations on circular linked list.: 
i) Creation 
ii) Insertion 
iii) Deletion 
iv) Traversal 
4. Write a program that implement stack (its operations) using 
i) Arrays 
ii) ADT 
5. Write a program that implement Queue (its operations) using 
i) Arrays 
ii) ADT 
6. Write a program that implements the following sorting methods to sort a given list of integers in 
ascending order 
i) Radix Sort,          
ii) Heap sort,         
iii) Shell Sort,        
iv) Tree Sort 
7. Write a program to implement the tree traversal methods (Recursive and Non-Recursive). 
8. Write a program to implement 
i) Binary Search tree 
ii) B Trees 
iii) B+ Trees 
iv) AVL trees v) Red - Black trees 
9. Write a program to implement the graph traversal methods. 
10. Write a program to implement the following Hash Functions: i) Division Method, ii) 
Multiplication Method, iii) Mid-square Method, iv) Folding Method 
TEXT BOOKS: 
1. Fundamentals of Data Structures in C, 2nd Edition, E. Horowitz, S. Sahni and Susan Anderson 
Freed, Universities Press. 
2. Data Structures using C – A. S. Tanenbaum, Y. Langsam, and M. J. Augenstein, PHI/Pearson 
Education. 
REFERENCE BOOK: 
1. Data Structures: A Pseudocode Approach with C, 2nd Edition, R. F. Gilberg and B. A. Forouzan, 
Cengage Learning