PR25 B.Tech. CSE Syllabus     
Pallavi Engineering College 
PCS208ES: PYTHON PROGRAMMING LABORATORY 
Common Syllabus for CSE, CSE-CS, CSE-DS, CSE-AI&ML, ECE, EEE, Civil Engineering 
B.Tech. I Year II Sem.  
Course Objectives: 
 
 
 
 
To install and run the Python interpreter 
To learn control structures. 
To Understand Lists, Dictionaries in python 
To Handle Strings and Files in Python 
Course Outcomes: After completion of the course, the student should be able to 
● Develop the application specific codes using python. 
● Understand Strings, Lists, Tuples and Dictionaries in Python 
● Verify programs using modular approach, file I/O, Python standard library 
● Implement Digital Systems using Python 
Note: The lab experiments will be like the following experiment examples 
List of Experiments: 
L  T  P   C 
0   0  2    1 
1. I. Use a web browser to go to the Python website http://python.org. This page contains 
information about Python and links to Python-related pages, and it gives you the ability to 
search the Python documentation. 
II. Start the Python interpreter and type help() to start the online help utility. 
2. Start a Python interpreter and use it as a Calculator. 
3. Write a program to calculate compound interest when principal, rate and number of periods 
are given. 
4. Read the name, address, email and phone number of a person through the keyboard and print 
the details. 
5. Print the below triangle using for loop.  
5 
4 4 
3 3 3 
2 2 2 2 
1 1 1 1 1 
6. Write a program to check whether the given input is digit or lowercase character or uppercase 
character or a special character(use 'if-else-if' ladder) 
7. Python program to print all prime numbers in a given interval (use break) 
8. Write a program to convert a list and tuple into arrays. 
9. Write a program to find common values between two arrays. 
10. Write a function called palindrome that takes a string argument and returnsTrue if it is a 
palindrome and False otherwise. Remember that you can use the built-in function len to check 
the length of a string. 
11. Write a function called is sorted that takes a list as a parameter and returns True if the list is 
sorted in ascending order and False otherwise. 
12. Write a function called has duplicates that takes a list and returns True if there is any element 
that appears more than once. It should not modify the original list. 
13. Write a function called remove duplicates that takes a list and returns a new list with only the 
unique elements from the original. Hint: they don’t have to be in the same order. 
14. The wordlist I provided, words.txt, doesn’t contain single letter words. So you might want to 
add “I”, “a”, and the empty string. 
15. Write a python code to read dictionary values from the user. Construct a function to invert its 
content. i.e., keys should be values and values should be keys. 
16. Add a comma between the characters. If the given word is 'Apple', it should become 'A,p,p,l,e' 
Page 10 of 39 
PR25 B.Tech. CSE Syllabus     
Pallavi Engineering College 
17. Remove the given word in all the places in a string? 
18. Write a function that takes a sentence as an input parameter and replaces the first letter of every 
word with the corresponding upper case letter and the rest of the letters in the word by 
corresponding letters in lower case without using a built-in function? 
19. Writes a recursive function that generates all binary strings of n-bit length 
20. Write a python program that defines a matrix and prints 
21. Write a python program to perform multiplication of two square matrices 
22. How do you make a module? Give an example of construction of a module using different 
geometrical shapes and operations on them as its functions. 
23. Use the structure of exception handling all general-purpose exceptions. 
24. Write a function called draw rectangle that takes a Canvas and a Rectangle as arguments and 
draws a representation of the Rectangle on the Canvas. 
25. Add an attribute named color to your Rectangle objects and modify draw rectangle so that it 
uses the color attribute as the fill color. 
26. Write a function called draw point that takes a Canvas and a Point as arguments and draws a 
representation of the Point on the Canvas. 
27. Define a new class called Circle with appropriate attributes and instantiate a few Circle objects. 
Write a function called draw circle that draws circles on the canvas. 
28. Write a python code to read a phone number and email-id from the user and validate it for 
correctness. 
29. Write a Python code to merge two given file contents into a third file. 
30. Write a Python code to open a given file and construct a function to check for given words 
present in it and display on found. 
31. Write a Python code to Read text from a text file, find the word with most number of occurrences 
32. Write a function that reads a file file1and displays the number of words, number of vowels, 
blank spaces, lower case letters and uppercase letters. 
33. Import numpy, Plotpy and Scipy and explore their functionalities. 
34. Install NumPy package with pip and explore it. 
35. Write a program to implement Digital Logic Gates – AND, OR, NOT, EX-OR 
36. Write a GUI program to create a window wizard having two text labels, two text fields and two 
buttons as Submit and Reset. 
TEXT BOOKS: 
1. Supercharged Python: Take your code to the next level, Overland 
2. Learning Python, Mark Lutz, O'reilly 
REFERENCE BOOKS: 
1. Python Programming: A Modern Approach, Vamsi Kurama, Pearson 
2. Python Programming A Modular Approach with Graphics, Database, Mobile, and Web 
Applications, Sheetal Taneja, Naveen Kumar, Pearson 
3. Introduction to Python Programming, Gowrishakar S, Veena A, CRC Press 
4. Programming with Python, A User’s Book, Michael Dawson, Cengage Learning, India Edition 
5. Python for Data Science, Dr. Mohd Abdul Hameed, Wiley publications 
6. Core Python Programming, Dr. R. Nageswara Rao, Dreamtech press 
7. Introduction to Python, Gowrishankar S, Veena A., CRC Press 